---
title: A Closer Look at Regenerative Economics
description: Understanding the foundation of regenerative finance
category: Learn
mainImage: "https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2016/10/09/19/19/coins-1726618_1280.jpg"
date: "August 18th, 2023"
author: "CARBON Copy Team"
authorSlug: "carbon-copy-team"
---

Regenerative economics is an evolving economic framework that seeks to reshape traditional economic models and embrace a more sustainable and inclusive approach to economic activity. Rooted in the principles of systems thinking and circular economy, it aims to create a harmonious balance between the economy, society, and the environment. This article covers the origins, key principles, goals, and examples of regenerative economics, while exploring its potential to foster a sustainable and thriving future for generations to come.

## Origins

It's important to note that regenerative economics is an evolving and interdisciplinary field that draws from a wide range of disciplines, including economics, ecology, biology, design, and sociology. As such, its development has been shaped by the collective efforts of researchers, practitioners, and activists who have contributed to the broader discourse on sustainability, resilience, and ecological restoration. While specific individuals or organizations have played crucial roles in promoting regenerative concepts, the concept itself has been built upon the work of many pioneers and innovators over time.

- **Biomimicry** - The idea of looking to nature for inspiration in designing sustainable and regenerative systems has been a significant influence on regenerative economics. [Biomimicry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biomimetics){:target="_blank"}, pioneered by Janine Benyus, involves observing and emulating nature's patterns and strategies to solve human challenges more sustainably.

- **Natural Capitalism** - The book "[Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next Industrial Revolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_Capitalism){:target="_blank"}," written by Paul Hawken, Amory Lovins, and Hunter Lovins in 1999, introduced the concept of valuing and preserving natural resources as a form of capital. It emphasized the need for businesses to adopt practices that are restorative and regenerative, rather than exploitative.

- **Cradle to Cradle** - Architect William McDonough and chemist Michael Braungart introduced the "[Cradle to Cradle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cradle-to-cradle_design){:target="_blank"}" framework, which advocates for designing products and systems that mimic the regenerative cycles found in nature. Their ideas align with the circular economy principles that underpin regenerative economics.

- **Permaculture** - [Permaculture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Permaculture){:target="_blank"} is an approach to designing agricultural and social systems that mimic natural ecosystems. It was developed by Bill Mollison and David Holmgren in the 1970s and has since influenced regenerative agriculture and sustainable community design.

- **Ecological Economics** - The field of [ecological economics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_economics){:target="_blank"}, which emerged in the late 20th century, emphasizes the integration of ecological and economic principles. It challenges traditional economic thinking by incorporating the finite nature of natural resources and the importance of environmental sustainability.

- **Sustainable Development** - The concept of [sustainable development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sustainable_development){:target="_blank"}, popularized in the 1980s by the Brundtland Commission's report "Our Common Future," laid the groundwork for discussions on how to achieve economic growth while safeguarding the environment and meeting the needs of present and future generations.

- **Circular Economy Thinking** - The concept of a [circular economy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circular_economy){:target="_blank"}, which gained traction in the 21st century, was a significant influence on regenerative economics. Ideas of waste reduction, resource efficiency, and closed-loop systems align closely with regenerative principles.

## Core principles

Regenerative economics is built upon the following core principles:

- **Systems Thinking** - Recognizing the intricate interconnections between economic, social, and ecological systems, regenerative economics emphasizes the importance of understanding the dynamic relationships and feedback loops that influence our world. By considering the impacts of economic activities on both society and the environment, it seeks to optimize resilience and adaptability.

- **Circular Economy** - Departing from the traditional linear "take, make, dispose" model, a circular economy seeks to design out waste and pollution by keeping resources and materials in continuous use. This principle promotes practices like recycling, upcycling, and extended product lifecycles, reducing the pressure on natural resources and fostering sustainability.

- **Regeneration of Natural Capital** - Natural capital includes ecosystems, biodiversity, clean air, and water resources. By promoting practices that enable nature to regenerate and thrive, regenerative economics recognizes the vital role healthy ecosystems play in sustaining life on Earth and supporting economic activities.

- **Social Well-being and Equity** - Regenerative economics seeks to create economic systems that benefit all members of society and address issues of poverty, inequality, and social justice. This includes providing access to education, healthcare, and meaningful employment opportunities for all, fostering a more inclusive and equitable society.

## Goals

The goals of regenerative economics are in stark contrast to those of traditional economics in that the environment is considered a capital asset that needs to be replenished. Specifically:

- **Sustainable Resource Management** - By embracing circular economy principles and minimizing waste, regenerative economics aims to reduce the ecological footprint of economic activities and ensure the responsible use of resources.

- **Ecological Restoration** - By actively participating in the protection and restoration of natural habitats, regenerative practices contribute to a healthier planet and a more resilient environment.

- **Enhanced Resilience** - Recognizing the increasing frequency of natural disasters and disruptions, regenerative economics seeks to reduce vulnerabilities and ensure that communities and ecosystems can recover and adapt effectively.

- **Empowering Local Communities** - By giving communities greater control over their economic activities and decision-making processes, regenerative economics fosters economic systems that are more attuned to local needs and values.

- **Long-Term Thinking and Intergenerational Equity** - Regenerative economics emphasizes the importance of considering the well-being of future generations and adopting policies and practices that do not compromise their ability to meet their needs.

## Practical examples

There are numerous examples of regenerative economics in the world today, some of which include:

- **Regenerative Agriculture** - In agriculture, regenerative practices go beyond sustainability. They focus on soil health, biodiversity, and ecosystem regeneration. Farmers employ techniques like cover cropping, crop rotation, and agroforestry to improve soil fertility and enhance the resilience of agricultural ecosystems.

- **Circular Design and Manufacturing** - Businesses embracing circular economy principles are reimagining their products and production processes. For instance, companies may design products for disassembly and reuse, implement take-back and recycling programs, and use renewable and recycled materials.

- **Renewable Energy Transition** - Regenerative economics promotes the transition to renewable energy sources, such as solar, wind, and hydroelectric power. This shift away from fossil fuels not only mitigates climate change but also fosters sustainable energy systems.

- **Community-Led Conservation** - Local communities often play a crucial role in protecting and restoring ecosystems. Community-led conservation efforts involve engaging stakeholders, including indigenous communities, in the management and preservation of natural resources.

Through sustainable resource management, ecological restoration, and empowering local communities, regenerative economics offers a pathway towards a more resilient and equitable world. With ongoing efforts to implement regenerative practices in various sectors, the potential for positive impact on both people and the planet is tremendous. By embracing regenerative economics, we can build a future that safeguards our environment, enhances our communities, and ensures a prosperous world for generations to come.
